This is Caroline Hunter interviewing Mark O'Connor at 11.51, no 1.51 on the 17th of April 2018.
Mark has signed the project consent form. This interview is being recorded for Wonderbras 25 project funded by HLF Cymru.
So Mark, what was your first instrument?
First instrument is drums, as always been.
I started later than I wanted to.
I wanted to play drums from, I don't know, probably around six or maybe even before.
But I got held back.
And then later on, many years later, age 13, I got my drums.
And that's been the constant really. That's been there all the time.
Did you get a drum kit or did you buy them steadily?
I got a kit. I went out. We couldn't afford a drum kit, you know, my mum and dad.
So they said, look, you know, if you can save, then they'll match me.
So I went out and I got a paper round.
And yeah, and I saved up all my money.
And then they matched me and I got my first kit.
And I loved it for a good while. And then I left it for a little while.
As kids do, they get into things, they get out of things.
And then luckily I wasn't out of it for too long.
I was back into it after sort of a year.
And then yeah, and then it's been a constant ever since really.
So yeah, I think definitely constant from age 14.
Did you learn any other instruments after that? So drums was from about 14.
I did at college at age 16.
We had to do keyboard skills as part of the performing arts course I was on at the time.
So I did two years of keyboard skills, which I think was brilliant, most useful.
And also we had to choose an instrument for our second study.
And on that course was a fantastic musician and tutor called Lee Goodall.
So I was, yeah, I felt very lucky to be around him and to be being taught by him.
And I thought, that's going to be my second instrument. I'm going to learn alto saxophone.
And so yeah, that quickly became my second study in college.
How old were you when you started? That was about 18, was it?
That was 16.
16?
Yeah, I went and did a performing arts BTEC national diploma straight after GCSEs.
And yeah, and that was, yeah, that was the sort of really the start of my music education really.
Oh, fantastic. So how did you hear about Wunderbros?
Well, first of all, I guess I used my feet and followed my ears really,
because I was in, I can remember playing in Brecon Festival, I think the year was 94 or 95, something like that, around that day.
And I can remember hearing a big sound down on the street and I walked up to it.
And it was, I later found out it was Wunderbros all stood in a formation that I have never really seen Wunderbros adopt ever since.
It was a big circle from what I can remember.
And I think maybe Jess or Rob in the middle, I can't quite remember which.
Yeah, and that was my first encounter with Wunderbros.
So it was, yeah, it was like I heard them live first.
Yeah, definitely.
And yeah, and then I didn't follow it up or anything after that.
But yeah, that was my first encounter with the band.
I was out on the street listening to them and I think they were playing Michael Jackson's Thriller.
Oh, were they? That was before my time.
Mine too.
When did you choose to join the band or how did that come about?
Well, the year was 97 and it was October.
And so, yeah, it came about by, I can't remember who got in touch.
I have a feeling it might have been Denise.
But it came about because Jess, the original drummer in the band, he was relocating to Germany, I think.
I'm pretty sure it was Germany.
And yeah, the drum chair needed filling.
So yeah, they asked me in 97 and I said yes.
And then it's been, yeah, it's been like a regular, a constant in my life ever since really.
Yes, absolutely.
How do you think your musical experiences have changed with Wanderbass as part of your life?
Well, I think musical experiences, well, they're all very different.
I think there's no, for a number of reasons, there's a lot of variables in Wanderbass.
And I think a big part of that also is no two gigs really are ever the same.
So the experiences are always quite different.
But I think, so the question was how the musical experiences affected.
Yes, how did the experiences of having Wanderbass as part of your musical life,
how have those experiences enhanced it, changed it, added to it maybe?
Oh, yeah, yeah, definitely added to it.
You know, like with most Wanderbass encounters, you're always finding things out.
You're always mixing with an amazing group of people.
Because it's quite a large group.
Yeah, more often than not, very large.
The times when we've been small, so few and far between, you know.
So yeah, I think that has shaped me quite a lot, I feel.
Because I guess on one level, being a musician, I guess I find in my life,
it's very often the case that I meet more musicians.
When I go to Wanderbass, I find myself not so much meeting musicians,
but meeting a much broader cross-section of society.
So, you know, of course I'm intrigued by that.
Yeah.
And I find the people there very interesting.
And I think for me, that's a big part of the charm of Wanderbass.
And it's part of the pull, I think, is that great mix that you get.
Yeah, and I think over the years, I couldn't tell you exactly how I feel it shaped me,
but I know it has and I know it's in there.
So can you tell me what experiences in particular stand out for you?
What particular projects maybe?
Yeah, there's been a lot.
I'd say the big ones are, I think the King Django was a big project for me.
I felt like the band went through quite a big change in that time.
Also, I think we got close to sort of forging a bit of a new band sound, if you like, I think at that time.
And it was brilliant, always brilliant to have a guest come in and just sort of take us to a new place.
I think that was really, really, really exciting.
And that's not the only time that that has happened, but I think for me that was definitely a bit of a personal highlight.
But amongst many, I think the 10-year birthday celebration or 10-year anniversary was really good.
And I think, I guess, in terms of concerts live playing, there's one memory that goes back a long way.
And I can't remember the year. I could probably find it out somehow.
I can remember us doing a jamboree at Druidston.
And it was the first one I'd ever played. And we were outside in the marquee.
And I'm not quite sure what was taking place, but basically the band was just really playing up.
And the audience there at the Druidston, the crowd at that jamboree were then meeting the band.
And then that made the band want to play up even more.
And I can just remember that very particular gig was, it was pretty powerful for me.
And just kind of feeling, I was at the first time where I felt some sort of wonder brass fire, where I felt, whoa, you know, that felt,
it felt like it was on the verge of out of control in a very good way.
That's a standout memory for me. I'm imagining I see the very late 90s or very early 2000s.
And then the other one that I think back to quite a bit is the first time travelling with the band, which was in 1999.
And we went to Cork Festival. And that was the first time for me to be away with wonder brass and also to be away with a big band.
I'd been away, you know, travelling with smaller units, smaller bands, but never with that kind of entourage or numbers.
It was amazing, you know.
And yeah, just arriving in a city, there just to play music and have fun with a group of that.
So there, that number was amazing really for me.
And that's again a really big memory, you know.
There's lots, there's lots. That's definitely two, you know, which I think big live experiences for me, you know, with the playing.
You know, whenever you're away in a land and you're in another country and your connection to that country is to play music.
That's quite an amazing starting point for being somewhere, you know.
So yeah, I think I took that opportunity with both hands really.
Yes. So obviously you feel very much part of the band now.
When do you think was the time when you began or how long did it take you to feel sort of, you know, part of the wonder brass family?
Oh.
Is it quite early on? Did it take you a while?
I don't know. That's an interesting one.
I think it must have happened quite early on because I can't remember really thinking, oh, I don't feel like I belong.
I can't never remember thinking that feeling. So it must have been quite soon.
And, you know, by the same token, I can never remember a point where I've gone. It's now, you know, I'm in.
I think I felt quite in from the beginning really.
I can remember other things about joining the band which weren't quite so immediate stuff.
You know, like the enormous repertoire that there was to learn and, you know, I think even that there is now.
You know, for anyone who's to come and join now would have probably the exact same feeling.
You know, I can remember, you know, much like just like now, we would meet every Tuesday and you would learn and learn and learn songs.
And then, you know, four or five months later, you're still learning more songs and you just, you know, maybe I was too preoccupied with that to think, crumbs, am I in the band yet?
I was, yeah, I was always knocked over at how just how long it took to really to feel like I was, yeah, I was on top of the repertoire, you know.
That felt like it took a year, if not more.
So what particularly are you looking forward to in the coming months and years through this project or where do you see further projects going?
Well, I guess with this project, I think it's, for me, part of the excitement is kind of, you know, looking back, kind of marking the distance and going, you know, because it's, I've been nearly 21 years in the band.
And so, you know, when I think back as much as I think of it in musical terms, also a lot of it is, you know, on very much social terms as well, you know.
So I think for this project, a lot of it will be the chat, really, seeing old friends and, yeah, you know, just having good chat and catching up and then hopefully, you know, playing some music and
and, yeah, sort of reliving the good times and making new times as well, you know, because the band changes so much, you know.
I'd say nearly, you know, obviously we've spoken about gigs change all the time, setups and, you know, variables, but year on year, it feels like the band changes shape in some form, you know.
So, yeah, I think catching up, seeing some friends, some old friends and also, I guess the other thing with this is the music, you know, some new songs and, you know, yeah, just getting on the sort of celebratory level of, you know,
everyone coming to play some new music and some old tunes as well.
And I think, yeah, I think that's my excitement for this project.
Oh, fantastic. Is there anything else that you want to add?
Well, I suppose, I mean, I'd love to say a massive thank you to Wunderbrass really for an incredible 20 years and, you know, there's no other situation like it and there's no other feeling like it.
There's no other feeling like it either, really.
Yeah, so thanks for that really. I've loved it.
Thank you, Mark.